Slide 0: title

Slide 1: Polyester waste: recycling by de-polymerisation?
  There are many ways to treat plastics waste:
    - throw it into nature ("landfill") and leave the pb to future generations
    - burn it (and leave the pb to future generations)
    - reuse it in lower-quality products
    - reuse it requires
        sorting
        use the good parts
        burn the bad parts

  I will talk about recycling in the true *cyclic* sense:
    take waste plastics, and
    turn it into the same-quality starting material

  Here are the players:
    PET bottles are the best waste. Recycling works.
      the PET recycled from bottles still more expensive than virgin PET
      get 96% of enzymatic de-polymerisation after 24h
    PET textile:
      70% of US consumers not aware that textiles are made of plastics
    PET fibers:
      industrial use, not so much known
    not only PET: PBT, mixtures of all kinds
    PBT:
      other plastics than PET do not work.

Slide 2: What do enzymes need? Prepare the polyesters:

  (start left): what do enzymes need to do a good job?
    - they act only on the surface
      provide as much surface as possible
    - they have difficulty with crystals
      we should make the substrate amorphous
    - they need some mobility of the substrate
      because their job is to bind to the polymer chains,
      and they cannot if they are totally stiff
    - maybe add one point:
      all this is possible because in the last years, new enzymes have been
      engineered, they are more stable at high temperature
      [TODO: verify with Melzel]

   (then right): what do we need to do when preparing the plastics?
    - grind it to a powder to get surface
    - but before that we have to make it amorphous:
        when we get the waste we get all sorts of structures inside
        so, melt it and freeze the amorphous structure with a quench (very rapid cooling)
    - to what temperature do we quench it?
        not below the glass temperature: too cold, no mobility
        not too high temperature, because we do not want to denaturate the enzymes
         (they are proteins)

      somewhere between glass temperature (Tg) and crystallisation temperature (Tc)
      what happens there?
        the substrate tends to form crystals
        but that takes a while
        so, we have growing crystallites, maybe also new ones that nucleate
        and while they grow, there is a time window for degradation

Slide 3: Competition: de-polymerisation vs. crystal growth

  In total, let us summarise this as a very simple model:

  - some amorphous material in blue
    enzymes come from outside and eat the material,
    so the blue sphere is shrinking in time

  - some initially present spherulites
    they grow in time
    and they are not degraded

  the race between shrinking and growing is on!
    (clicks)

  in the end, we have no amorphous material anymore,
  only degraded and crystallites.

  The egg-shape is the result of the geometric intersection of a shrinking and
  a growing sphere.
  We obtain clusters of such egg-shapes.

  There are two main quantities of interest: How much of the volume could be
  degraded, and how long did it take?
  We have a numerical code to answer these questions.

  It measures all the surfaces in this geometry. We know how much volume of the
  three different types we have at what time. We know the final clusters, and
  their respective volume and surface.

  Dependence of the parameters:
    Easy for fast growing -- we get a dense big cluster, hardly any degraded.
                          -- that is the case for PBT
    Easy for slow growing -- we get the initial state, maybe many individual spherulites.
                          -- that is pure bottle PET
    All intermediate cases are also possible.

  The shape of the final outcome is important for a second stage of the degradation.
  First to know how big they are, you want to sieve them!
  Second, for further step of degradation:
  The rate on the solid material is not strictly zero, but one order of magnitude slower.
  It matters whether we have many little cluster with much exposed surface
  or one big dense block.

Slide 4: Competition: de-polymerisation vs. crystal growth

  Fast and slow growth are easy to understand.
  Also high and low initial crystallinity.

  There is another parameter dependence that is strangely neglected in the literature.

  Often, the focus is given on the initial crystallinity, but this actually
  implies two independent parameters. Can have the same initial volume as many
  spherulites, or few.

  The difference is dramatic.
  Imagine a material with a lot of internal fillers or pigments, or plasticisers, or catalysts.
  They act as nucleating agents, and there will be many spherulites. Even if
  you dilute the material with the best "purest" waste you have, it will still
  remain bad.

  [Does that also apply to mixing PBT into PET?]

Slide 5: How to slow down crystallisation?

  Now we understand a little better what parameters we want to look at.
  We learn that mixing bad waste with a lot of nucleating agents with good
  waste is not a good strategy.

  One can now try to apply the model to become predictive:
  Find the right parameters for the material, then try to optimize.
  This can be useful. Of course, the prediction works better for well-sorted
  wastes -- and that remains a big problem.

  At this point I want to advertise a radically new idea.
  Instead of sorting the waste, let us mix it.
  Then heat it for a long time.

  Two things happen: The polymer chains exchange monomers, we get random chains.
  And the chains start to connect as a network.
  Both effects reduce crystallisation.
  In this plot mix bad PET with even worse PBT. The blend, after treatment,
  recycles extremely well.

Slide 6: This was really a group effort:

  had to combine different expertise:
    physico-chemistry of polymers
    design of enzymes
    modeling

Additional points:

* Welzel:
  Im Falle des Exo-Mechanismus werden Monomere oder kurzkettige Oligomere
  sukzessive vom Kettenende abgespalten. Beim Endo-Mechanismus hingegen erfolgt
  die enzymatische Spaltung ohne bevorzugte Angriffsstelle statistisch verteilt
  über die Polymerkette.

* Da die Enzyme aufgrund ihrer Größe nicht in den Kunststoff eindringen können,
  stellt der Bioabbau einen Grenzflächenprozess dar, und das Material wird von
  der Oberfläche her abgetragen.



